# i18n

No one modern app can avoid multi language support. Framework supports internalization out of the box.

All internalization based on [i18next](https://www.i18next.com/) library

## Detectors

As we are talking about languages then we need some way for the codebase to understand what language the user should use.

That feature is called detectors.

Order of detection:

- X-Lang header
- Query
- User

### X-Lang header detector

This detector will parse “X-Lang” header on request to detect user language. Frontend should add here user language (“en”,”fr”, etc) and if backend support it that app will use given user language

:::tip
“xLang” preferred way to work with languages on framework
:::

Example for frontend with axios

```js
axios.get("https://example.com/getSomething", {
  headers: {
    "X-Lang": "en", // Added language
  },
});
```

```js
const api = axios.create({
      baseURL: process.env.APP_SERVER_URL,
      headers: {
        'Content-Type': 'application/json',
        'X-Lang': 'en' // Added language
      },

 // change it after
api.defaults.headers.common['X-Lang'] = 'fr';
```

### Query detector

Query is a simple detector. Just add the 'lookupQuerystring' parameter to your query string. 'lookupQuerystring' by default is **lng**, but you can change it as you want inside config file

```js
const res = await fetch("httsp://someUrl.com?lng=en");
```

### User detector

User detectors try to find authorized users (that provided by middleware) and grab ‘locale field’ from this user.

### Adding own detector

That time you are not able to add your own detector. Please contact us if you need that option and we will be happy to help you

## Configuration

Please look at the ‘config/i18n.js’ file for all configuration options. There are limited amount of options available

## Language files

All files in JSON format located on ‘src/locales/{localeCode}/translations.json’

:::note

Bakends beside files not supported

:::

You can find details documentation about json files on [i18next json documentation](https://www.i18next.com/misc/json-format)

## API

Framework provides easy integration for controllers. You can grab i18n instance with

```js
req.appInfo.i18n;
req.appInfo.i18n.language; // current language
req.appInfo.i18n.t("some.phrase"); // translate some phrase https://www.i18next.com/overview/api#t
```

:::tip

You can pass controller ‘request’ errors as strings for internalization. And it be processed with i18next

```js
class SomeController extends AbstractController {
  get routes() {
    return {
      post: {
        "/login": {
          handler: this.postLogin,
          request: yup.object().shape({
            email: yup.string().email().required("auth.emailProvided"), // <-- look here i18n
          }),
        },
      },
    };
  }
}
```

:::
